.TH NLEASH 1 "May 2026" "nleash" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
nleash \- limit per-process network bandwidth (egress, ingress, or both) using cgroup v2 and eBPF
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B nleash
[--rate RATE] [--burst SIZE] [--ingress-rate RATE] [--ingress-burst SIZE]
(--pid PID | -- command [args...])

.B nleash
--pid PID --clear

.B nleash
--list [--json]

.B nleash
--stats [--pid PID] [--json]
.SH DESCRIPTION
nleash applies per-process bandwidth limits using cgroup v2 plus two small
eBPF programs attached at BPF_CGROUP_INET_EGRESS and BPF_CGROUP_INET_INGRESS.
It creates a child cgroup under the target's existing cgroup, moves the
process in, and attaches per-direction token-bucket rate limiters. Packets
that exceed the configured rate are dropped; TCP backs off via congestion
control.

Either direction may be shaped independently. A rate of 0 (i.e. the option
not specified) means that direction is unshaped. At least one of
.BR --rate
or
.BR --ingress-rate
is required.
.PP
For non-root usage, nleash can exec a setuid-root helper (nleash-helper)
that performs the privileged operations. The helper enforces that non-root
callers can only act on their own processes and drops privileges before
executing commands.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR --rate " " RATE
Outbound (egress) rate cap. Accepts tc-style bit-per-second suffixes:
.BR bit ,
.BR kbit ,
.BR mbit ,
.BR gbit
(e.g.\&
.BR 500kbit ,
.BR 10mbit ).
.TP
.BR --ingress-rate " " RATE
Inbound (ingress) rate cap. Same syntax as --rate. Note: ingress drops
happen after the bytes have reached the receiver's NIC, so this controls
what the receiver application sees but does not reduce upstream link load.
.TP
.BR --burst " " SIZE
Egress token-bucket capacity in bytes. Suffixes:
.BR b ,
.BR kb ,
.BR mb .
Default is rate * 50ms with a 3KB floor.
.TP
.BR --ingress-burst " " SIZE
Ingress token-bucket capacity. Same syntax and default as --burst.
.TP
.BR --pid " " PID
Target an existing process. Only sockets opened after the leash is
applied will be throttled (kernel limitation: socket-cgroup association
is fixed at socket() time).
.TP
.B --clear
Clear the leash for the given PID. Performs identity safety checks; if the
identity tuple (pid, starttime_ticks, boot_id) does not match the recorded
leash, nleash will only remove its own bpf/cgroup state and not touch any
live process.
.TP
.B --list
List current leashes (from /run/nleash/state.txt).
.TP
.B --stats
Show byte counters per leash, broken out by direction (egress pass / egress
drop / ingress pass / ingress drop) read from the BPF map.
.TP
.B --json
Machine-readable JSON for --list / --stats.
.SH REQUIREMENTS
- Linux kernel >= 5.15 (bpf_spin_lock in cgroup_skb programs)
- cgroup v2 mounted at /sys/fs/cgroup
- bpffs mounted at /sys/fs/bpf (systemd default)
- CAP_NET_ADMIN + CAP_BPF, or run via setuid helper
.SH NOTES
.BR Effective\ throughput :
nleash is a rate ceiling, not a precise pacer. Drop-based shaping plus
TCP loss recovery typically delivers 30-80% of the configured rate on real
links. UDP losses are silent.
.PP
.BR Very\ low\ rates\ on\ loopback :
on sub-millisecond-RTT loopback, TCP can collapse before the bucket refills,
stalling the connection entirely. The --stats drop counters confirm BPF is
enforcing; the connection just doesn't recover. Pick a higher rate or test
against a remote endpoint.
.SH SAFETY
Leashes are keyed by (pid, starttime_ticks, boot_id). If the identity does
not match during --clear, nleash does not touch any live process and only
removes stale bpf/cgroup state.
.SH FILES
/run/nleash/state.txt
/run/nleash/nextid
/sys/fs/bpf/nleash/{prog_egress,prog_ingress,buckets}
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR bpf (2),
.BR cgroups (7)
